The Blue came and it threatened to destroy the whole world. To defeat it only the combine power of all superheroes would do, and whoever was to bring all that power against The Blue was sure to die in blazing glory. Of course the best of them volunteered to do it. Ultimate, the Man with the Metal Face. So it was that all superheroes got together in a final sacrifice to save the world, and save it they did, at an unimaginable cost to themselves. Except one of them didn't show up. PenUltimate, Ultimate's sidekick, was done with being a superhero. He was a regular person now, trying to do good by his wife. Having lost his mentor, Pen was now the last superhero alive, the only one who didn't want to be one. When mysterious bombings begin plaguing Arcadia City, Pen is the only one who's able to do something about it. Will he?



Strength, The Woman With No Weakness, now has plenty of those. Doctor Speed, who was once so fast he could perform twelve surgeries while simultaneously fighting some villain , is now a disfunctional alcoholic whose family left him until he fixes himself. All these once superheroes are left to figure out what gives their lives meaning now that they are no longer defined by their powers, yet they all think, as in every superhero story, that the powers will come back. Nothing is bad enough that it doesn't. A superhero dies? He'll come back. A villain dies? He'll come back too. There's no consequences, there's only playing the game, a sequence of predictable motions that forever repeat themselves. A new menace dooms the town with no salvation in sight. A team of superheroes arrive at the scene to deal with this new threat but it's harder than they anticipated, this one might be too strong for them to deal with it. It all seems lost when at the last possible second they find just what they need to win the fight and Arcadia is saved once more. Until a new villain appears. They're all aware of the broader regularities from which the game emerges. They know that having your parents killed when you're just a kid is a great backstory to a superhero. That if you find yourself falling from the sky bound to hit the ground to your death something or someone will save you just in the nick of time. And hey if nothing does and you fall to your death nothing to worry, you'll come back. All superheroes eventually do.

This knowledge propels them now that they have no powers to speak of. Ultimate died, the best of them all, so maybe they just have to wait a little while longer until everything comes back to normal. They'll become the heroes they once were, fighting the same old villains as they once did. Yet PenUltimate doesn't want things to go back to as they were. He made a promise to his wife and he intends to keep it, and he does is best too but they need him now more than ever. It is this conflict between what Pen wants to do versus what he must do that propels the story forward. Sure, there's a deeper mistery regarding why Arcadia is being attacked, but this is like wood to a fire. A tool used to examine Pen and the other characters as they struggle with their circunstances.  

In fact, A Once Crowded Sky is more of a character study than a genre novel. Everything that the novel does it does so in order to explore the state of mind and psychology profile of these characters as they deal with their situation, from the prose to the plot itself. It uses a very limited third person view that relies a lot on repetition and self-reflection to flesh out what is going through their minds. The dialogue is messy just as in real life, a strength that Tom King likely developed while writing for comics. 
