---
layout: post
title:  Thoughts on The Secret Life of Fat
Categories: Reviews
tags: [books,review]
---
[The Secret Life of Fat](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Secret-Life-Fat-science-greatest/dp/1911274007/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1492979287&sr=8-1&keywords=secret+life+of+fat) is a surprisingly good book on the recent-ish research on fat. I was pretty surprised with how good the book is since I was expecting a run-of-the-mill popular science book with some interesting tidbits but a lot of padding and uninteresting storytelling. While it does use stories to push the book forward, the author has such a clear grasp on how to tell a story that I actually enjoyed, for a change, those moments in the book. Plus, the science she talks about is fairly interesting in and of itself, and while she does not go into too much depth in any given issue, which is understandable this being a popular science book, I was still was able to enjoy the breadth of the things she does talk about. In a way this book, along with [Guyenet's recent one](https://www.amazon.co.uk/Hungry-Brain-Outsmarting-Instincts-Overeat-x/dp/125008119X/ref=sr_1_sc_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1492979098&sr=8-1-spell&keywords=guyemet), represent a much needed popularization of what is actually known about obesity and what determines body fatness. Hopefully those doctors that still hold to the conventional view of obesity will update their knowledge on the topic and government officials will stop wasting money on ineffectual campaigns (one can wish).

One of the things I was actually surprised about was something I actually already knew but didn't appreciate, which is just how endogenous body fatness is. The standard view is that body fatness is largely regulated through two exogenous variables, calories in - calories out, and that's all there is to it. If you're fat then you're either getting to much calories in or not enough calories out, hence the treatment is fairly simple: eat less, move more. If after knowing this you're still fat then shame on you, you're a lazy pig and should be mocked you fat ass.
But hold on, what the science actually says is that while that simple equation might by fairly correct in that the body can't hide from the laws of thermodynamics, it hides the interplay between a variety of systems that determine just how much actual fat you end up producing from the net result of that equation. This is a point [Miles Kimball](https://storify.com/mileskimball/how-the-calories-in-calories-out-theory-obscures-t) made recently on Twitter and I understand it better now.

Body fatness is determined by a lot of things: genes (yes genes, what else would it be? It's fun to mock fat people by saying "but muh genetics" but how could genes NOT influence such an important organ in the body?), your microbiome (interestingly, sterile mice being fed the same calories than normal mice end up getting leaner because their microbiome is deprived of the bacteria that are able to digest the food going through the digestive system, which makes sense in an evolutionary framework but because in our current environment getting those additional calories from food is somewhat of a bad thing, because we get fat, my intuition was to think that sterile mice would be unhealthier, i.e. they would get fat), your hormones, the thermic cost of ingestion (this one I got from Doug McGuffs book), etc. In addition to what's discussed in Sylvia's book, Guyenet further details how the palatability of the food you eat literally alters your brain and impairs your ability to resist to the temptation of eating highly palatable food (you can get an overview here), so there's another thing to keep in mind with regards to obesity in that obese people might literally be mentally deficient in their decision making capabilities. There's a quote in Sylvia's book with regards to sticking to diets that's applicable here:

*"Losing it [weight] is like trying to hold your breath underwater. Tell someone to hold his breath underwater for ten minutes. Andit's like "Wow, look at that!' But could I do that? No, I couldn't"*

The book deals with Coleman's parabiosis experiments, Friedman's discovery of leptin, takes a segway into Dhurandhar's research on how viruses can induce obesity, explores why fat is a good thing (if you don't have too little of it or not too much), uses lots of case studies to motivate the subject in each chapter, and ends up with some advice on how to deal with your weight problems. Because the author is such a good storyteller the book is never boring, and because she too struggled/struggles with weight issues she has an interesting empathy with the struggle that it can be trying to lose weight.

Like with Guyenet's book she goes into how changes in fat percentage induce changes in the brain to compensate for those losses so that the body can get that lost fat back. In a way what they set out is a lipostat theory of body fatness. Guyenet's focuses more on this topic, I've recently characterized his book as a tour through the neuroscience of eating, but he doesn't deal with other things that the Secret Life of Fat does, namely, the Secret Life of Fat dedicates two chapters in why females need fat (puberty, reproduction, menstruation) and why they have such a hard time losing it.
One of these days I'll write something on what this might mean with regards to social policy. Since my thinking on wealth redistribution has already been somewhat altered by the idea that low IQ people suffer in high knowledge economy through no fault of their own, what does it mean that highly palatable food, let's say pizza, might literally be impairing people's decision making capabilities? What if, on net, highly processed foods are bad for society? Should we ban them? Tax them? I am not ready to mark my position in this for pretence of knowledge reasons, but it does make one wonder.

With regards to belief updating in government officials and the medical community, one does wonder what the demographics of obesity would look like today if belief updating was more common. What if a significant percentage of current obese people would not be if the government (or doctors) knew better, and taught those new, better, ways to deal with increased fat? What's the mental damage needlessly being caused today that would not be, discounting the obvious physical costs? I ask myself why the rationalist community doesn't consider the trying to ameliorate the obesity epidemic a viable path towards the solving of various existential risks.

Anyway, amazing book that is approachable enough for me to recommend to everyone who wishes an introduction that's not to challenging to the topic.
